---
title: 'GSoC 2023 Report'
date: 2023-08-20
permalink: /posts/gsoc/lpython/post-13/
tags:
  - GSoC
  - LPython
---
<!--more-->
For GSoC 2023, I worked with [LPython](https://lpython.org) - a high performance typed Python compiler. In particular, I worked on **implementing and improving advanced data structures**. My mentors were [Gagandeep Singh](https://github.com/czgdp1807) and [Thirumalai Shaktivel](https://github.com/Thirumalai-Shaktivel).

I worked on several data structures, improving existing implementations, and introducing others. Weekly blogs can be found [here](https://virendrakabra14.github.io/blog-posts/). In this report, major contributions and learnings are summarized.

## List and Tuple

The `list` implementation was lacking in many standard and commonly-used CPython functions, which were added. These include
- `index`
- `count`
- `pop`
- `reverse`

Some of these are overloaded, and implementations were added to make them CPython-compatible. Examples include `pop` and `index`.

Next, support for arbitrary amount of nesting involving `list` and `tuple` was added. An example:
```python
l: list[list[tuple(i32, f64)]] = [[(1, 2.0), (3, 4.0)], [(5, 6.0)]]
```

Further, tuple and list comparison operators were added. For example,
```python
assert [1, 2] > [0, 1, 2]
assert (1, 2) < (3, 1)
```

Wherever possible, the `IntrinsicFunction` architecture was used. This prevents unnecessary nodes of the form `ListFunction` in the ASR. We just register these functions like `list.function` under the umbrella of `IntrinsicFunction`.

## Dictionary

`dict` \(hash-map\) has Linear-Probing and Separate-Chaining implementations
- **Linear-Probing** is an open-addressing collision-resolution technique. All key-value pairs are stored in a single place, and key-collisions are resolved by probing for the next empty location. It is ensured that the fractional-occupancy does not cross a predetermined threshold. This is also used in the **CPython** implementation.
- **Separate-Chaining** uses separate linked-lists for each hash-value, where resolving collisions is simply adding elements to the corresponding linked-list. As with Linear-Probing, it is ensured that the fractional-occupancy does not exceed a threshold. This is used in the **C++ STL** implementation of `unordered_map`.

Existing implementations had [issues](https://github.com/lcompilers/lpython/issues/2230) in insertion and deletion of elements. These were fixed.

Next, frequently-used functions `dict.keys` and `dict.values` were added. Unlike CPython, LPython does not support views, so lists are returned instead.

Further, support for nested dictionaries was added. These are of the form
```python
d: dict[i32, dict[i32, i32]] = {1: {2: 4, 3: 9}, 7: {8: 64, 9: 81}}
d[3] = {4: 16, 5: 25}
d[1][10] = 100
```

## Set

We introduced sets (hash-sets).

Similar to dictionaries, we provide two collision-resolution schemes - Linear-Probing and Separate-Chaining. An overview of these techniques was given in the previous section. Now we present some more implementation-specific details:

- Hash computation: Similar to both CPython (`set`) and C++ (`unordered_set`), for integers it is the integer itself (modulo `set` capacity). For strings, we use Polynomial Rolling Hash.

- Linear Probing
    - A single list of elements is maintained. Further, there is a list storing masks, that indicates if an element is present or not. The following mask values are used
        - 0: no element placed
        - 1: element placed without probing (i.e., hash value and position are same)
        - 2: element placed with probing
        - 3: tombstone (i.e., element was deleted, and now this position is empty)
    - Insertion and deletion routines are implemented as per the standard linear probing scheme

- Separate Chaining
    - Here, a chain (linked-list) of elements is maintained at each hash location. For example, to access the `i`th linked-list
    - This linked-list has items of the form `element, next`, where `next` is a pointer to the next element in this list (or `nullptr` if none exists)
    - Set insertion and deletion occur via these lists

- Benchmarking
    - [Gist](https://gist.github.com/kabra1110/fe86159c81a7cfed7c4f52e11e7fa3c6): Here we use randomized benchmarks, where low-overhead psuedorandom number generation is done using [Lehmer random number generator](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lehmer_random_number_generator).
    - It is to be emphasized that LPython easily surpasses C++ and Python.

## Learnings

I learnt a lot over the entire period. Most importantly, it was a great experience to be part of an open-source project of this scale! I had recently taken a Compilers course in university, and got to closely see the innards of one here. Moreover, I got introduced to LLVM, and implemented data-structures and algorithms for an actual compiler.

## Thank You!

I would like to thank [Ondřej Čertík](https://github.com/certik/) for the conception of this wonderful compiler. My mentors [Gagandeep Singh](https://github.com/czgdp1807) and [Thirumalai Shaktivel](https://github.com/Thirumalai-Shaktivel) were immensely helpful before and during this entire project. Thank you! Finally, thanks to all LPython contributors on whose work I could build on.
